<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<text>
A Memory of a Pleasant Evening with Mira Furlan in Rijeka
"People are more likely to punish the one who names things than the one who acts," said the acclaimed actress Mira Furlan (1955–2021).
Crnjanski put it well: "There is no death, only migrations." And the greatest, as we know, depart in body but remain forever through their work, words, and the essence they radiate and represent.
There is no doubt, Mira Furlan is among them.
In addition to her remarkable acting achievements in this region and those in the USA, The New York Times notes that Mira Furlan is “the Balkan equivalent of Meryl Streep.”
Words flow about her human qualities, character, and personality...
If only a fraction of this could have been said back in 1991 when she left these - hatred- and war-ravaged - lands, moving first to New York and then to LA, because for people like her, there was neither space nor life here.
Her famous letter from that same 1991 resonates even today, occasionally appearing in the media.
Her brilliant roles echo as well.
As does their spirit, embodied in what Mira Stupica once described by saying, "We actors cannot keep or give away our roles.
For instance, I cannot give my Petrunjela to my granddaughter."
I interviewed Mira several times.
Some of the interviews we did by email, but here I'll mention one done under the veil of night in the theater bar of Rijeka’s Croatian National Theatre, Ivan Zajc, in March 2016.
At that time, the theater’s director was Oliver Frljić, who brought Mira Furlan back to perform in the HNK after 25 years.
That evening, she had played the second encore of “Cassandra”, a production directed by Nada Kokotović based on the novel by Christa Wolf, which had attracted great attention from both critics and audiences.
The atmosphere in the bar was pleasantly unique, infused with that magical, artistic, and theatrical essence that often radiates after a performance...
She was direct yet dignified, warm yet graceful...
“It’s a profound, powerful, universal story about war, about a woman in war,” said Mira Furlan, speaking about “Cassandra”.
</text>